OFF-EP 0005b (#34)
openforcefield/standards: docs/enhancement-proposals/off-ep-0005.md

* The boundary conditions (e.g. dielectric at infinity) for the Ewald sum are not specified
* The Ewald method is only intended for periodic systems; unmodified vacuum electrostatics are intended for non-periodic systems
* The treatment of intramolecular electrostatics exceptions is unspecified
* The choice `reaction-field` does not uniquely specify the functional form for the true reaction-field model intended; many variants are available
* The solvent dielectric constant was not specified.
* Cutoffs were not specified
* The physical constants used to compute the potential were unspecified

To solve these issues, this OFF-EP proposes:
* The `method` attribute is replaced with `periodic_potential` in analogy to other parameters that use the `potential` term to specify the functional form or a common choice
* The `periodic_potential` attribute defaults to `Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary` as a valid keyword that states that the Ewald periodic sum with conducting boundary conditions should be the true potential used for periodic systems
* PME (and other methods) are permissible approximations to Ewald as long as they are controlled.

> * For reaction field or other methods, the `periodic_potential` can specify the exact functional form used for the periodic potential or a keyword denoting a common choice, along with the optional `cutoff` and `solvent_dielectric` attributes

Reviewer: (not blocking) We currently also specify `solvent_dielectric` in the [GBSA section](https://github.com/openforcefield/standards/blob/17e57c934e449b8ab79462bd2db245d73b26913b/docs/standards/smirnoff.md#gbsa). As far as I understand the math, it would be fine for these to have a different value, but I wanted to double check that nobody else sees any fundamental problem that this could create.

Author: I think our philosophy is to keep constants like this local to their parameter sections as much as possible.

However, this does suggest we may want to group multiple tags hierarchically in the future if there is a desire to ensure information is shared.

* The `nonperiodic_potential` attribute defaults to `Coulomb` indicating the Coulomb potential is to be used in non-periodic systems, though other functional forms are accepted.
* The `exception_potential` attribute defaults to `Coulomb`, indicating the Coulomb potential is to be used for exceptions, though other functional forms are accepted.

> * We explicitly specify which self-consistent physical constants should be used to compute

Reviewer: (not blocking)
```suggestion
* We explicitly specify which self-consistent physical constants should be used.
```

* We reserve the possibility of adding specific keywords to specify reaction field potentials for `periodic_potential`

## Usage and Impact

Since most force fields use some flavor of PME for periodic systems and something similar to
`nonperiodic_potential="Coulomb"` for non-periodic systems, the default attributes for this tag will
likely be the most commonly-used. Splitting `method` out into explicit attributes to specify periodic,
nonperiodic, and exception potential energy terms, however, makes it less
ambiguous how electrostatics should be handled in each case and decouples the method used in each
case.

Users are recommended to consider upgrading from the default attribute values of 0.3 to 0.4 to avoid
continuing to use this ambiguity. Implementations may wish to execute this up-conversion automatically (see below).

If backward-compatibility is provided as specified below, users of old force fields will not need to update their force field definitions.

## Backward compatibility

To minimize pain in implementations, we can allow implementations continue to accept `method="PME"` as a synonym for `periodic_potential="Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary"` for a few releases,

> issuing a warning that the spec has changed and this behavior may be removed in a future release.

Reviewer: (not blocking) Thankfully, I don't think this is a concern. Since this change will be accompanied by an `Electrostatics` section version change, implementations will know which keywords are expected from each version. My plan for the Toolkit would be to just automatically up-convert any Electrostatics section that is read from 0.3 to 0.4 (though if there are strong objections I could try to implement round trip support for both versions, but that would be expensive, brittle, and complex).

Implementations may wish to add up-converters from old versions. An up-converter could convert the following tag header
```
<Electrostatics version="0.3" method="PME" scale12="0.0" scale13="0.0" scale14="0.833333" scale15="1.0"/>
```
to a less ambiguous header using version 0.4, which for this case could be
```
<Electrostatics version="0.4" periodic_potential="Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary" nonperiodic_potential="Coulomb" exception_potential="Coulomb" scale12="0.0" scale13="0.0" scale14="0.833333" scale15="1.0"/>
```

## Detailed description

[CODATA 2018](https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/index.html) physical constants are used.

> Future OFF-EPs may migrate the specification of which self-consistent physical constants are used to a higher-level attribute.

Author: > I share Matt's concerns that ensuring use of a specific CODATA will be very difficult when crossing the the boundaries of software ecosystems (like, when we export to another package, what if they use different physical constants? 

As I note below, if the constants defined in the force field and simulation package are explicitly specified/known, the parameters can be correctly converted to reproduce the intended energies.

> What if that other package updates its constants in a new release - How would we know which version we're exporting to?). 

This question answers itself: Export requires the specific release of the package to be specified in order to correctly export the parameters in a manner that ensures the energies are correctly computed.

The `method` tag attribute is **removed** and replaced with `periodic_potential`, `nonperiodic_potential`, and `exception_potential`.

The optional `cutoff` tag attribute is added to specify the cutoff used for `periodic_potential` if applicable, defaulting to `None`.
No value of `cutoff` is allowed for Ewald methods---only finite-ranged methods.

> The optional `solvent_dielectric` tag attribute is added to specify the solvent dielectric used with finite-ranged potentials, defaulting to `78.5`.

Reviewer: (not blocking) To other reviewers - I have no strong opinion about this default value, but you should be aware that `78.5` matches the default `solvent_dielectric` value in the [GBSA tag.](https://github.com/openforcefield/standards/blob/17e57c934e449b8ab79462bd2db245d73b26913b/docs/standards/smirnoff.md#gbsa)

# OFF-EP 0005 — Allow different electrostatics methods to be used on period and non-periodic systems

> **Status:** Proposed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Status:** Accepted
```

> **Authors:** Matt Thompson and John Chodera

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Authors:** Matt Thompson and John Chodera, Jeffrey Wagner
```

If the 0.3 section's `method` does not actually involve the use of a `cutoff` or `switch_width` (such as is the case if `method="PME"`), those values may be set to their defaults in the 0.4 `Electrostatics` section.

The value of the 0.4 `Electrostatics` section's `solvent_dielectric` should be set to `none`.

## Detailed description

### In the general SMIRNOFF spec description

A section is added stating that [CODATA 2018](https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/index.html) physical constants are used in all released SMIRNOFF versions to date.
Future OFF-EPs may migrate the specification of which self-consistent physical constants are used to a higher-level attribute.

### In the `Electrostatics` section

The `method` tag attribute is **removed** and replaced with `periodic_potential`, `nonperiodic_potential`, and `exception_potential`.

The optional `solvent_dielectric` tag attribute is added to specify the solvent dielectric used with finite-ranged potentials, defaulting to `none`.

For `periodic_potential`:

* `Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary` (default) denotes that the Ewald potential with conducting (dielectric 0) boundary conditions are used

> * `Coulomb` denotes that the standard Coulomb potential should be used with specified cutoff `cutoff` and optionally switch width `switch_width`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `Coulomb` denotes that the standard Coulomb potential should be used with no cutoff or reaction-field attenuation
```

* A function denotes that the specified function should be used, which may make use of `cutoff`, `switch_width`, and/or `solvent_dielectric` terms
* Future OFF-EPs may add specific keywords for common choices of reaction field electrostatics

For `nonperiodic_potential`:

* `Coulomb` (default) denotes that the standard Coulomb potential should be used with no cutoff or reaction-field attenuation
* A function denotes that the specified function should be used, which may make use of `cutoff`, `switch_width`, and/or `solvent_dielectric` terms

For `exception_potential`:

> * `Coulomb` (default) denotes that the standard Coulomb potential should be used

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* `Coulomb` (default) denotes that the standard Coulomb potential should be used with no cutoff or reaction-field attenuation
```

### In the general SMIRNOFF spec description

A section is added stating that [CODATA 2018](https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/index.html) physical constants are used in all released SMIRNOFF versions to date.
Future OFF-EPs may migrate the specification of which self-consistent physical constants are used to a higher-level attribute.

### In the `Electrostatics` section

The `method` tag attribute is **removed** and replaced with `periodic_potential`, `nonperiodic_potential`, and `exception_potential`.

The `cutoff` tag attribute is **removed** and replaced with `periodic_cutoff` and `nonperiodic_cutoff`.

The `solvent_dielectric` tag attribute is added.

The optional `nonperiodic_cutoff` tag attribute is intended to have the same meaning as the previous `cutoff` attribute, defaulting to `9.0*angstrom`. 

The optional `nonperiodic_switch_width` tag attribute is intended to have the same meaning as the previous `switch_width` attribute, defaulting to `0*angstrom`.

The optional `periodic_cutoff` and `periodic_switch_width` tag attributes are added to specify the cutoff and switching width used for `periodic_potential` if applicable, both defaulting to `none`.

> Only `periodic_cutoff="none"` and `periodic_switch_width="none"` is allowed for Ewald methods---only finite-ranged methods should set these to a non-`none` value.

Reviewer: I started adding this table to the spec, and ran into two ambiguities:
* should `solvent_dielectric` be required to be `none` as well? Probably.
* if a FF specifies a custom `nonperiodic_potential` that wants a cutoff, but selects `Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary` for the `periodic_potential`, is the `cutoff` allowed to be non-none?

I'm coming around to thinking that we should tell people in the spec "hey, these values won't actually be used", but not formally restricting them. As long as any of them could appear in a custom periodic, nonperiodic, or exception potential, it'll be really complex to validate them.

issuing a warning that the spec has changed and this behavior may be removed in a future release.

Implementations may wish to add up-converters from old versions. An up-converter could convert the following tag header
```
<Electrostatics version="0.3" method="PME" scale12="0.0" scale13="0.0" scale14="0.833333" scale15="1.0"/>
```
to a less ambiguous header using version 0.4, which for this case could be
```
<Electrostatics version="0.4" periodic_potential="Ewald3D-ConductingBoundary" nonperiodic_potential="Coulomb" exception_potential="Coulomb" scale12="0.0" scale13="0.0" scale14="0.833333" scale15="1.0"/>
```

## Detailed description

[CODATA 2018](https://physics.nist.gov/cuu/Constants/index.html) physical constants are used.
Future OFF-EPs may migrate the specification of which self-consistent physical constants are used to a higher-level attribute.

The `method` tag attribute is **removed** and replaced with `periodic_potential`, `nonperiodic_potential`, and `exception_potential`.

The optional `cutoff` tag attribute is added to specify the cutoff used for `periodic_potential` if applicable, defaulting to `None`.

> No value of `cutoff` is allowed for Ewald methods---only finite-ranged methods.

Reviewer: I'm updating the SMIRNOFF spec text and realized that I don't understand this - The existing `Electrostatics` tag already has a `cutoff` attribute, which defaults to `9.0 * unit.angstrom`. Is the proposal here to split the existing `cutoff` attribute into `cutoff_periodic` and `cutoff_nonperiodic`?

Reviewer 3: I think (especially if I wrote this, I don't know) that line 88 should refer to "`cutoff_potential` if applicable ..."and not allowed/ignored for Ewald/Ewald-X methods that do not have a concept of a cutoff.

A cutoff _is_ applicable for the niche use case of #6. I think for other non-periodic potentials ("no cutoff" is the only one that comes to mind) it does not apply.
